My name is Andrew Titus.
I teach grade seven
language arts and social studies
at George Street Middle school.
Today I want to talk about
the George Street Cycling Squad.
And how it contributes
to wellbeing at our school.
So the cycling club is a group
that I put together a number of years ago,
which combines getting kids
outside to ride around on the trails,
to learn basic trail etiquette,
to learn about the trail network itself
so that they know where they're going
and they don't get lost,
to learn basic maintenance as well.
And then for some of the kids
who really get into it, we talk about,
we talk about skills and techniques,
surrounding cycling.
So sometimes for the kids that I have,
that's
about riding fast on the trails
or getting or getting good at it.
This year
I have a bunch of mountain bikers.
So we have been developing
our skills of mountain biking like
climbing and descending,
creating pace lines
to go fast, learning about gearing and,
and that kind of thing.
So I sort of make it I model it around
the people who are involved
in the things that they're interested in.
We also have larger organizations
that are become part of this as well.
So we have a we have, we have an
initiative at school called spark.
And what that is, is three times a year
for four Fridays in a row.
The kids get to choose between a whole
gamut of, activities that we have
for them.
This ranges from archery
to chess to robotics to biking.
And so through the initiative
that I've been able to put in place over
the last few years, we've
raised a lot of money, and the community
has supported us, and we have created
a fleet of bikes that we have.
So what this does is through spark,
what we're able to do as well is
we can take kids of various levels
of ability and get them out as well.
So we have sort of a beginner's level.
We have an intermediate,
we have an advanced
sort of adventure group that we have.
And so what it does
is it breaks down barriers to kids
who may want to go out and do that,
but for for who whatever reason,
they can't afford or
can't they don't have access to bicycles.
Maybe they
maybe they don't even know how to ride.
I've taught kids actually, like,
starting from scratch how to ride bikes.
But it makes it
so that there is a social component.
They get to meet people
that maybe they wouldn't meet otherwise.
They get to get out and get around a city
that maybe they don't have access to,
and they get to ride bikes where they may
or may not have a bicycle themselves.
So it I feel as though the George Street
Cycling Squad and in connection
to spark contributes to wellbeing
in school in a number of different ways.
There's a social way,
there's an emotional way,
and there's a physical way,
which also extends even into learning
new skills and techniques
of maintenance and repair.
Any school would need to acknowledge,
first of all, that
if they want to start a cycling group,
which I strongly recommend,
that they need to accept, first of all,
that not every kid is going to have a bike
and that even if they do have a bike,
it might not be a great bike.
So that might mean that
it doesn't sit well.
In which case
they're not going to enjoy it
or it mechanically has difficulties,
in which case
that is potentially even dangerous.
So what that means is that means that,
like certain kinds of contact
with the community needs to be made,
not necessarily first,
but very, very early on in the development
of your own cycling club.
So what you need to do is
you need to the way that I did it,
which I found to be very effective,
was reach out to the community,
the reach out to the community and say,
does anybody have any bikes kicking around
that are in their garage,
that are in the basement, that are in
good working order
that you can deliver to me?
So that I can
so that I can help other kids?
That's the first one.
The next one is to make contact
with local bicycle shops.
So, you know, it might be one shop.
It might be all of them. Right.
But you need to go and talk
to the owner of the cycling shop, like,
not the person at the front desk.
And you need to tell them who you are.
And my experience has been that if you
speak to the owner of a bicycle shop
and you say, I want to put kids on bikes,
they're on board.
They just want to help.
They have been so helpful to me
in so many ways.
They might give you deals on fixing bikes.
They might give you deals on equipment
that you need.
They might even they might
even donate bikes that they have.
They will almost undoubtedly send
their mechanic over to hang out with you
for a day, to help you fix bikes
and to teach the kids what they're doing.
The next one
is to reach out to the community again,
looking for expertise.
Is there anybody in the community,
either in your teaching community
or in the community at large,
who is who knows something, right?
Who knows how to fix bikes already?
Who is interested
in hanging out with kids?
And do they want to help you?
In the last stage is to keep
your eyes open for funding opportunities.
One of the big mistakes
that I made right off the bat was
I took in a whole bunch of donated bikes.
I put in a lot of time
and effort into fixing them,
and then I started giving them away.
Right now, that's the good part.
The bad part is that
I had to do it every year,
because I would give all the bikes away,
and then the next year would come around.
They wouldn't have any.
So what you need to do is
you need to build like a fleet of bikes
and then sort of
have some that are on rotation.
And the way to do that
is to look for funding opportunities.
Now that could be inside the school system
as a whole, or it might be outside.
I was very, very fortunate in the fact
that because I'm a cyclist myself
and I'm connected to my own
cycling community, that word came my way,
that there was an organization called
the Sotherton Medical Staff Association
who were looking to fund a wellness
initiative
inside the community
somewhere that had to do with kids.
And it was a perfect fit for me.
So I wrote up a long description
about what we do and why it's important,
which is exactly the same
kind of information I'm giving you.
I submitted my application
and forgot about it.
About six months later,
I received word from them
that I had been granted
a fairly substantial amount of money.
And with that, I was able to buy bikes.
I was able to buy used bikes, new bikes,
equipment, tools, all that kind of stuff,
which now I have as the core of my
of my, of my collection of bikes.
Then when people donate them,
I can fix them up or whatever.
And those are the bikes that I give away.
So I always have some, and so looking for
funding opportunities is crucial.
So I would say reach out
to your community,
connect with your bike shop,
look for funding opportunities.
And if you can secure all of those, like,
I think that you can have a very
healthy, long term,
life to your to your to your biking clubs.